---
layout: post
title:  "Relationship between PPARG Expression and Cell Area"
author: Xinyue Gu
jhed: xgu18
categories: [ HW1 ]
image: homework/hw1/hw1_xgu18.png
featured: false
---

## What data types are you visualizing?
I am visualizing quantitative data of the expression count of the PPARG gene for each cell, quantitative data of the area for each cell, and spatial data regarding the x,y centroid positions for each cell.

## What data encodings are you using to visualize these data types?
I am using the geometric primitive of points to represent each cell. 
To encode expression count of the PPARG gene, I am using the visual channel saturation going from an unsaturated lightgrey to a saturated blue.
To encode the area for each cell, I am using the visual channel of size (area/10). 
To encode the spatial x position, I am using the visual channel of position along the x axis. 
To encode the spatial y position, I am using the visual channel of position along the y axis. 

## What type of data visualization is this? What about the data are you trying to make salient through this data visualization? 
My explanatory data visualization seeks to make more salient to see if there is a relationship between the spatial position & size and the expression of PPARG gene. (I have tried several other genes but those yield a similar result)

## What Gestalt principles or knowledge about perceptiveness of visual encodings are you using to accomplish this?
I am using the Gestalt principle of proximity to put my legends on one side. 

## Code

```{r}

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)

library(ggplot2)

data <- read.csv("~/Desktop/GitHub_Repo/genomic-data-visualization-notes/project/bulbasaur.csv",row.names = 1)
```


```{r plotting }
ggplot(data = data) + geom_point(aes (x = x_centroid, y = y_centroid, col = PPARG, size = area/10)) + 
    scale_colour_gradient(low ='lightgrey',high='blue' )+ 
    theme_classic() + 
    ggtitle("Un-normalized expression of PPARG gene")

```
```

